---
title: fictional works
draft: "incomplete draft"
author:
- name: Maarten Steenhagen
  affiliation: University of Antwerp
  email: "maarten.steenhagen@uantwerpen.be"
date: September 2015
abstract: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
...

Fictions can be about many different sorts of things. We're used to focus on fictional people, animals or monsters. But some completely fictional stories tell us about pieces of prose or literature written by fictional characters. All of these are _fictional works_. Briony, the main character of McEwan's _Atonement_ writes a play, _The Trials of Arabella_. Although no doubt based on real people, the character of Briony is a merely fictional one. For that reason, it seems, _The Trials of Arabella_ is a merely fictional works. Or is it? 

There is something puzzling about that play, as a fictional entity. Plays can be performed. We read how the play is rehearsed by Briony's cousins a few pages later, and how the house is preparing itself for the first performance of the drama piece (as it turns out, the first performance in the story is only more than half a century later). It seems uncontroversial that works written or composed in a fiction can also be performed in that fiction. We are very familiar with stories that tell us of the execution or performance of merely fictional works, and there does not seem anything strange about this [see also @hayaki2009aa, who focuses on fictions in fictions, and investigates their nested structure using iterative fiction operators]. Yet to me it seems equally clear that Briony's play can just as well be presented to an audience outside McEwan's story. And here I do not mean to an audience in _another_ story, as when a fictional entity that originates in one corpus makes a _cameo_, as it were, in another fictional work. I mean that the play could just as well be performed by actual people, to an actual audience, on an actual stage. If some of us got together and tried, I don't see why we couldn't try performing _The Trials of Arabella_, the play Briony wrote, right now in this very room. 

I think this possibility has philosophical ramifications. In what follows I want to defend a conclusion. I first propose an explanation of this phenomenon. The explanation I want to propose points to the _abstract_ character of the works in question: all of them are _types_, artefacts created by people that allow, because of the kind of thing they are, for multiple instantiation. My point I hope will make good sense, and is not far fetched at all. I want to bring out is that the predicate 'fictional' or 'real' and the qualification 'in the fiction' or 'in the real world' do not apply at the level of types (this is very tentative and needs revision).


Can fictional particulars manage to enter into the real world? Could Sherlock Holmes, for example, ever actually walk through the Baker Street in London? We tell children that the bogeyman is just a fiction to explain why they should be afraid of the monster's being under their bed. In general it is tempting to assume that fictional entities cannot exist in real life precisely because they find their origin in a fiction. We're happy to allow for real-world creatures to figure in our stories, but are reluctant to believe that things that have their origin in a bit of fantasy could show up in reality. 

I think is an assumption implicit in much philosophical reflection on the nature of fiction. Specifically, it seems to be many assume that a fictional entity could not have the non-fictional property of being here and now with us, in this room. But on reflection this assumption reveals itself to be untenable. Consider the following example. Briony, a main character in McEwan's _Atonement_, writes a play: _The Trials of Arabella_.    

> The play---for which Briony had designed the posters, programs and tickets, constructed the sales booth out of a folding screen tipped on its side, and lined the collection box in red crêpe paper---was written by her in a two-day tempest of composition, causing her to miss a breakfast and a lunch. When the preparations were complete, she had nothing to do but contemplate her finished draft and wait for the appearance of her cousins from the distant north [@mcewan0000aa,p. ??].

Readers of the novel get very little information about the play itself, but this does not take it away that such a fictional play could very well be performed by us in this very room. Of course this would be an occurrence that is different from that of Sherlock Holmes walking in, of course. But the point is that it seems to violate the assumption that fictional entities cannot have the non-ficitional property of being here with us. That play would be here with us when we performed it. 

In this paper I discuss a puzzling phenomenon where just this seems to happen. Some authors of literary works tell us of pieces of prose or literature written by fictional characters. Some stories are about pieces of music composed originally by a protagonist, or about a poem imaginatively conceived on a Sunday afternoon in an East-Sussex farmhouse that does not exist in real life. All such works are 'fictional works'---works written, created or invented _within_ a fiction. Their authors are fictional characters. They are makers, creator, artists that do not exist. 



This possibility of 'fiction-to-world bleeding', as we could call it, seems quite general (though how far it reaches, we will see, is itself an interesting question). For example, couldn't I recite here the poem composed by a fictional character? And couldn't the London Review reproduce a letter that was written by and addressed to mere figments of the imagination? I think so. In all such cases, what seemed a fictional entity---a work created by a fictional character---would manage with our help to enter into the actual world. A fictional stanza may resound in the very room you're in. A fictional play may be performed by real people. A fictional libretto may be sung and recorded in an actual studio.

Let us assume that this is right, and that we've identified a possible phenomenon. Fictional works probably have been realised many times. But isn't there is something deeply puzzling about such cases? 

On the face of it the play Bethany wrote is not a real play. Just as Sherlock Holmes is not a real detective or the Bogeyperson is not a real monster, Briony's play does not seem to be created in the actual world. Yet if we saw people on a stage trying to perform _The Trials_, giving voice to its lines and expression and life to its characters, wouldn't we be willing to say they were performing a play? Wouldn't we be willing to say that it was _The Trials_ they were performing? And wouldn't we be happy to attribute that play to Briony? If so, it seems, Briony's play would also not seem fictional to us, as it would be performed right before our eyes. he puzzle is that we have just as much reason to deny that the play performed on the stage is fictional as we have reason to deny that it is real.



1. It is comforting to assume that fictional particulars cannot make their way into the real world (especially if we're dealing with particulars). 
2. Creationism is an alternative to platonism and eliminativism. Fictional entities have properties according to the fiction, and non-fictional properties. Holmes is fictionally a detective. "In the fiction, Holmes lives in London. Holmes does not really live in London, he only fictionally lives in London. He is not clever, he is only fictionally clever and so on."
2. Yet this isn't defensible, it seems to me. We've got examples of  repeatable works of art that are created in a fiction. These examples seem to suggest that it is possible for a fictional entity to make its way into the real world. We can for example perform the play Briony wrote in McEwan's Atonement. 
3. My aim in this paper is to show that examples like this put pressure on some common assumptions about the way created type relate to history, and shed light on the special (intentional) status of notation or scoring.
3. So how is this possible given the way fiction and reality are separated off from one another? I think that what explains that possibility is that the work under consideration is a _type_. This shows that the idea of repeatability as such is not sensitive to the fiction/reality divide. (Contrast: it does abide by a temporal divide between past and future.) This suggests that created types behave a bit more like pure universals than some seem to think. 
4. In particular, it proves it to be false that all "created types trace historical chains of (re)production", as Walters suggests.  
5. Moreover, it seems to reverse what kind of properties are fictional, and what are not. Now that the play is created by Briony is only fictionally so, while that the play has a cast of six characters is, it seems, not merely fictionally so. 
4. We can contrast this with concrete particulars. Paintings are often not conceived of as types, and it seems also not possible to produce the painting painted in Wilde's novel. Similarly, Sherlock Holmes as a fictional character seems confined, and at best we can have impersonations or look-alikes. 
5. That created types are repeatable does not yet get us a full explanation. For not all fictional created types, it seems, allow to be generated outside the fiction. Some tokens of created types rely for their generation on an historical connection with the act of creation. And there simply cannot be historical connections between fictional narratives and the actual world. 
6. This is where notation, recipes or scores come in. It is because the generation of tokens of some types depends on following a set of rules or guidelines for the production of works that it is possible for us to generate tokens of fictionally created types. 



## Authorship in fiction

At first sight it may seem attractive to take the puzzle to arise because of a confusion about authorship. It may be supposed that because Briony wrote that play in the fiction, it is only _true in the fiction_ that the play we see is written by Briony. When we perform that play, it is not _actually_ true that Briony wrote it, and so the real play is not fictional at all. This apparent resolution of the puzzle rests on a mistake.

In real life not by Briony but by McEwan. In the story by Briony. This won't work, for together with the assumption that we're performing _The Trials of Arabella_ (a particular play written in the story), we generate contradictions. 

The examples I mentioned all concern fictional characters that are presented as authors or artists in the story that contains them. In the story Briony writes a play, say, and she is presented explicitly as the author of that play. We could say that this makes it 'true in the fiction' that they wrote that play. But I think we can say more about their authorship. We conceive of the play as a particular that figures in the story, in more or less the way we conceive of Sherlock Holmes as a particular (more or less; they are significantly different, as I will explain later. @hayaki2009aa, p.381 equates them too easily, I think). Just as Sherlock Holmes was (presumably) born from specific parents, and so can be said to be the son of someone essentially, Briony's play is essentially her invention. It is part of the identity conditions of the play she wrote that is written by her---the play has that authorship essentially. (No doubt this can be made more precise, but it will do for now.)

Note that this does not imply that Briony _actually_ wrote that play, that she wrote it somewhere and at some time in the real world. She obviously didn't because she doesn't exist (assuming McEwan presented a fictional character). She wrote the play _in the story_, but this does not take away that her act of writing, her authorship, is part of our concept of that particular play, just as his having some parents is part of our conception of Sherlock Holmes. 

What I am trying to bring out here is that the claim 'Briony wrote it' would be true of the play if it somehow managed to emerge in the actual world, for example by being performed by a bunch of willing and charitable readers of McEwan's novel.  Perhaps we can bring out this feature in a formalisation using a fiction operator (FICT). 

It is common to adopt approach claims about fictions and claims in fictions with a concept of 'truth in fiction (TF)', contrasting with unqualified truth (T) or with a specific object language operator ($\oint$), roughly capturing the interjection ‘according to the story,...’. ('the story' here is quite flexible: it can mean a specific work, a specific corpus of works, or even fiction in general [cf. @sainsbury2005aa, p. 203].) 

Call our performance _p_. Of _p_, it may be said that Briony wrote it. The view am considering here claims that in such a statement there is an implicit fiction operator active. 

F: Briony is _p_'s author 
T: $\oint$ Briony is _p_'s author

An alternative way of putting this. 

F: Briony is _p_'s author 
TF: Briony is _p_'s author 

If that is right, then it is false that the piece we perform was written by a fictional character---it is only written by a fictional character _according to the fiction_. 

I want to resist this reading. If it is false that Briony is P's author, then it is true that Briony is not P's author. I take it that a work of art is created by its author essentially. And I take it that if S authored A, and x is an instance of A, then S authored x. So if it is true that Briony is not P's author, but it is true that Briony is A's author, then P is not an instance of it. Yet by hypothesis the play we performed, P, was an instance of the play Briony wrote in the story. That implies P both is and is not an instance of the same story. We're now faced with a contradiction. 

Imagine we perform Briony's play. We're staging a theatrical performance and enact the scenes she conceived in the story, we speak the lines she thought up for her characters. Here we have an instance of a work of theatre, we can see it and be amused or frustrated by it. But it is nonetheless true of this play that it was  only written by Briony in the fiction. In the actual world, _no one_ wrote that play.

We may contrast this. Sainsbury writes that 

> Trouble begins when we consider sentences like ‘Tony Blair admires Coriolanus’ which state real truths (not mere truths in fiction) and which cannot be regarded as implicitly prefixed by an ‘according to the story’ operator. [@sainsbury2005aa, p. 195]

The previous of course does not make the puzzle go away. But what it does do is remove one apparent way out that may have seemed attractive. This would be to propose that although we can perform the play in real life, when we do so it would not be true of the work we perform that Briony wrote it. The point is that this would be to have one's cake and eat it, which in this case does not seem possible. For, either we are not performing that particular play (merely a counterpart of it), or she did write it, be it in the fiction. We are working on the hypothesis that it is at least in principle possible to stage or print fictional works, and so should conclude that it is at least in principle possible that a fictional character wrote the play we staged. The important thing to realise is that this does not commit us to the claim that Briony wrote that play in the actual world. She didn't. All we need to acknowledge that it is actually true that Briony wrote that play in a fiction. 

## Resolving the puzzle: abstract entities and the reality/fiction divide


It seems to me that the explanation for this possibility has to do with the fact that a play is a _repeatable_ artefact. It is something created at a specific point in time, but it allows for instances of it to be generated. 


I've pointed to a phenomenon that seems very well possible. I've constructed an example based on a fictional work in one of McEwan's novels. We've seen that the phenomenon (and so the example) is puzzling in light of the distinction between fictional and real entities. I now want to suggest a way to resolve the puzzlement. It's an explanation of how it is possible for fictional entities of the sort I discussed to make their entrance into the real world. 

What is the explanation? In brief, i want to suggest that it is because they are abstract that certain fictional entities are able to make the jump into the real world, with some help of course.

The claim that plays, novels, operas and the like are abstract is familiar. It is commonly held that such works are _types_. But it is controversial. It is controversial because this would seem to require abstract entities to be created at some point in time. I think that those sceptical of this possibility are in the grip of an overgeneralisation (see @walters2012aa for a clear diagnosis of this mistake). Several authors have defended the idea that a play or a novel is a repeatable type that was created by someone at some point in time. I find that idea plausible, it captures well the idea that such works are repeatable and that they are created. 

Note, however, I do not think that the explanation I need to defend here needs to be very specific about the sort of abstracta novels or operas are. Indeed, it would be unwelcome if the explanation we arrive at was dressed up with the wardrobe of very specific positions in the philosophy of art if those specific positions were not themselves entailed by the possibility of the kind of fiction/reality transgressions I identified above. (A bit abstractly phrased, this, but we get the point: I want to take care not to make assumptions unnecessarily.) Here's Walters on this point:

> The claim that repeatable artworks are types which are created constitutes the bare-bones of a type-creationist treatment of repeatable artworks, a treatment that can be fleshed out in numerous ways. [@walters2012aa, p. ??]

What I do here is take on board the obvious claim that repeatable artworks are types, and I will assume for the sake of argument that they are created ones. That is as far as I need to go. I think that, as uncreated types, it is fairly obvious that such works allow for instances in the actual world as well as in the world of the fiction. It really is a 'creationist' attitude towards repeatable works that presents us with the puzzle. This is because as created types such works seem tied to a history or world in a way that makes it unclear how they could escape it.

The main point about novels, operas and the like is that they are repeatable. This is a pretheoretic datum, I think. We start out with the observation that some works allow for multiple instances, performances or incarnations, whereas others do not. The idea that some works are 'types' is a theoretical way of giving this prima facie difference a place in our theorising about the nature of works of art. So far so good. This is a story that has been told over and over again, and it does not in any way involve the phenomenon of fiction-to-world transgressions I identified above. In other words, the starting point of the explanation I want to defend is completely general, familiar, and widely accepted: some works of art allow for multiple instantiations. 

What fictional characters like Sherlock Holmes have in common with types is that, it seems, just as nothing really is Sherlock Holmes, nothing really the type. We conceive of fictional characters in the same way, and just as  ‘Sherlock Holmes’ may be a name without a referent, so may 'the Red Flag' be. (But it seems to me that if they indeed were without referents, they would be so for different reasons.)

It could be thought that something is created by x if and only if x brings the thing into existence. Given that Briony's play does not exist, she cannot have created it. This again is too quick. For, according to the fiction the play does of course exist, and so according to the fiction she has created it. This does help us identify where exactly these things start to bleed. For the facts about the existence of the type and facts about its authorship are fictional ones, all obtaining merely according to a fiction, at least at a first glance. It is only once instances start to show up in the real world that these facts become actual: suddenly the play performed exists also in the actual world, and was written by Briony. Interestingly, it remains true that the play was only written 'in the fiction', not in the actual world.

Being invited to go see a play written by a fictional personage in a fictional scenario would only be puzzling if we assumed that those works that allow for multiple instantiation only allow for instantiations in the world in which they were written, composed or otherwise created. On such an assumption it would seem impossible for a play written in a fictional scenario to be performed in a real-world setting. But of course the assumption is highly questionable, and in effect the examples discussed themselves put pressure on it. Why think that works that allow for multiple instantiation only allow for instantiations in the world in which they were written, composed or otherwise created?

In answer to this question, there _is_ indeed a good reason to think this. So much I admit. But I want to suggest it only holds for some of the repeatable works we are familiar with, not all. The reason that works that allow for multiple instantiation only allow for instantiations in the world in which they were created, the answer goes, is that instantiations depend for their identity (i.e. for their being instances of the works in question) on a causal/historical tie to some original plate, mould, or Ur-form, or to some original act of creation or conception. Without such a causal tie an object can at best be a simulacrum of an instantiation. And causal/historical ties cannot run between fictional worlds and the actual world.

I find this a good point. But to my mind, all it shows is that being abstract is not sufficient for the kind of fiction-to-world jump we've been interested in to be possible. It doesn't show that it is impossible, for it is not at all obvious that all instantiations of abstract works are in that way dependent on a causal/historical tie. In the next section I want to explain how there's an alternative route to instantiation, but also that this alternative route requires a work of art of a very specific sort.

The point I have wanted to make in this section is that because plays, novels, and operas allow are repeatables, fictional novels, plays, and operas can be printed, performed and sung in real life. What seemed an _obstacle_ to this, the fact that they are created merely in a fiction, is not an obstacle. And this is telling. What does it tell? It tells us something about the place of such abstract objects. They neither belong to the actual world, nor to any possible world, but they hover strangely over them, so to say. They are like balloons let up by individuals, able to drift across borders. 

## Notation

Nelson Goodman stressed the importance of notation in the arts. He suggested that it is only when works make use of notational systems that they can have clear identity criteria [check]. I do not wish to follow him in this claim, which has proven highly controversial [see @wollheim1980ab]. I want to highlight the role of notation in facilitating or enabling the fiction/real transfer discussed above. This is because abstractness in and of itself is not sufficient for transferability.

Abstract entities come in a variety of forms. What do an opera, the Volkswagen Beetle and an optical image have in common? The answer is that they allow for multiple instantiation at the same time. That is, we think of the Volkswagen as an abstract entity because at one and the same time we can find instances of the same car in a variety of locations, say in both Germany, Portugal and the Netherland Antilles. Similarly, Parsifal can be performed next Wednesday night both in Sydney and in New York (though in this case of course not simultaneously in the evening). Nelson Goodman argued that what makes a car count as an instance of a Beetle is different from what makes one instance of an opera count as an instance of Parsifal. (Note, the distinction here lies within the allographic, and shouldn't be conflated with the distinction between allographic and autographic. All allographic works of art are abstract, only some of them allow (or require) multiplication via notation.) He thought that for operas and many other works of art, it is conformity to score that makes for the identity of the instances (tokens) of the work (type). Now I have already said that I do not wish to follow Goodman on this point, but he is clearly pointing to a distinction we surely can accept. Some abstracta can be multiplied _via_ their scores or notational representations, while others cannot. 

We may think of a score as a formula or recipe. Follow these steps and one has created an instance of such and such a type. The steps in question are 'original'. In contrast, instances of other abstracta rely for their identity on some kind of historical lineage, some kind of magical transfer, some kind of shared past. Think of the pound coins in your wallet, all of these count as pound coins because they share their origin in an institution and were produced in a place that counts as metaphysically privileged or special in their histories. This is what Goodman saw rightly, I think. All he did was assume in addition a thesis about the insignificance of the historical to identity. And that is a thesis I feel no need to accept, at least not as a general thesis about types of works.  

The point then is that it is only those types that can be multiplied _via_ notation (and it needs to be made more precise what this amounts to) that allow to be 'exported' from a fiction, precisely because here there is no need for an historical flow or shared history. All that is needed for such works is either actual conformity to a score (as Goodman had it) or just the intention to conform to a score (as Wollheim seems to hold). And both conditions surely can be fulfilled by our pack of eager actors trying to perform Briony's play in real life. 

Walters puts it nicely when he writes that for works as created types, "Further tokens can be generated, then, either by copying existing tokens, or else by producing tokens according to a recipe, or from storage." The point is that when such a type is  created in a fiction, it is not possible to copy it because of a historical discontinuity, but it is possible to produce a token according to a recipe. We need not follow Goodman in thinking that 'following a recipe' can be done quite accidentally, and instead may still assume that there is an important role for the intention of the individual who follows the recipe (e.g. produces a series of sounds that conform to a score).

When we talk about abstracta, we can talk about universals or particulars. If we talk about universals, then fiction/reality transgressions seem uncontroversial. The quantity of cups on the table may be the number of dwarfs that aid Snow White, my tie may have the colour of Alice's apron in the Looking Glass, your nose may have the shape of that of captain Aleb's in Moby Dick. But if we talk about abstract particulars, then we are talking about entities that have an historical dimension. (Goodman denied this, and in effect treated novels and operas as universals. On his picture, it should be obvious that we can perform Briony's play.) The Buick was invented at some point in time, and so instances of it could not predate its invention, for example. Mere qualitative identity does not suffice for instantiation of an abstract particular; the historical setting must be right as well. It is for this reason that some abstract particulars cannot 'jump worlds', so to say, and in particular cannot jump from fictions to reality. If novels and operas are abstract particulars, then their notational character liberates them, and allows them to break free from their fictional settings. 

Let me briefly sum up where this leaves us. We're concerned with repeatable artworks that figure in a fiction. The question is, can instances of such works make their way into the real world? I noted that if we conceive of repeatable works as 'pure universals', there is nothing strange or controversial about the idea. This is because something instantiates a pure universal already if it has the right qualitaties: the identity of such universals is a matter of mere resemblance. It is only if we think that these repeatable artworks are not pure universals but created types. I explained why it is compelling to think that they are, but it should then be clear that the puzzle becomes pressing. As created types, I explained, works can allow their instances to be produced by copying or imprinting or some other form of historical 'sympathy' (there is an interesting tie between these forms of production and forms of magic as described most famously by Frazer). But other created types are such that their instances can be generated simply by following a score or recipe. I suggested that this kind of following seems to be more than just accidental conformation, and has an intentional component. However, I suggested, this intentional component does not presuppose the kind of historical contiguity that is presupposed by the sympathetic model. So it is not right to think that tokens of all created types must trace an historical chain. When there's a score or recipe, the intention to follow that recipe ('the recipe for producing an instance of this type') may be sufficient for the production of a token, when successful to a relevant degree. 


## 'Real' and 'Fictional'

I now want to argue that the play Briony wrote was neither real nor fictional in the way Ian McEwan is real and Sherlock Holmes fictional. This is (in part?) because a play is not a concrete particular but an abstract one. The situation is this: we've got two predicates that typically are taken to be exclusive (contraries). If some x is fictional, it isn't real, and if it is real it isn't fictional. But are they also contradictories? That is, if we know something isn't real, do we know it's fictional and vice versa? I think this is not the case. Not all unreal things are fictions, it seems. The highest prime number, for example, doesn't exist but it isn't a fictional entity either. (Are all possibilia either real or fictional? Also not, I think, but that point needs further defence.)

An alternative way to go: the play is merely fictional as long as no tokens of it exist in the actual world. As soon as a token of the play exists in the actual world, the play itself exists (as a type) in the actual world. (Walters brings out how "what is required to avoid problems with the persistence of properties and repeatable artworks is to reject The Strengthened Instantiation Principle, and this can be done without embracing either The Weakened Principle of Instantiation or The Principle of Instantiation." This is relevant here as well. ) This entails that the play is not merely fictional. (Some plays, as types, on this line of thinking, of course, are merely actual.) This is an interesting suggestion or alternative, and it is useful to have a discussion of what could make us decide between this alternative and the earlier suggestion that the labels 'fictional' or 'real' do not apply at the level of types.  

## Some further thoughts

Science fiction is a genre that is full of fictional artefacts, things or products or inventions that do not actually exist. There is a way in which such artefacts can become reality as well. Jules Verne described the submarine, it seems, and the moon rocket. When he wrote these were merely fictional artefacts, but after his stories were published those things became realities as well. Did Verne invent the submarine? The orbital rocket? To me this is not obvious. It seems that here we do have reason to suggest that what got invented later were counterparts of the inventions in his story, unless of course he presented in his story the 'breakthrough' technology that made these things actually possible. (This point requires further elaboration.)

## The view that fictional entities are abstract objects

Some suggest that fictional entities or characters as such are abstract objects. Though not in obvious contradiction with what I said, this view sits ill with the way I have proposed to think of the situation. To my mind, it seems clear that Sherlock Holmes was intended as a concrete individual in the world of the fiction. What is gained by holding onto the idea that he is nonetheless an abstract entity? 
